Implement documentation Dynamic Groups of Dynamic Groups (#2130)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/models/extras/dynamicgroup.md

# Dynamic Groups

> A Dynamic Group provides a way to organize objects of the same Content Type by matching filters. The Dynamic Group can be used to create unique groups of objects matching a given filter, such as Devices for a specific site location or set of locations. As indicated by the name, Dynamic Groups update in real time as member objects are created, updated, or deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Dynamic Group provides a way to organize objects of the same Content Type by matching filters. The Dynamic Group can be used to create unique groups of objects matching a given filter, such as Devices for a specific site location or set of locations. As indicated by the name, Dynamic Groups update in real time as potential member objects are created, updated, or deleted.
```

> When creating a Dynamic Group, one must select a Content Type to which it is associated, for example `dcim.device`. The filtering parameters saved to the group behave as a bi-directional search query that used to identify members of that group, and can also be used to determine from an individual object the list of Dynamic Groups to which it belongs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a Dynamic Group, one must select a Content Type to which it is associated, for example `dcim.device`. The filtering parameters saved to the group behave as a bi-directional search query that used to identify members of that group, and can also be used to determine the list of Dynamic Groups to which an individual object belongs.
```

Once created the Content Type for a Dynamic Group may not be modified as this relationship is tightly-coupled to the available filtering parameters. All other fields may be updated at any time.

## Basic Filtering

Dynamic Groups filtering is powered by **FilterSet** objects underneath the hood. Basic filtering is performed using the `filter` that is defined on a given Dynamic Group.

> An object is considered to be a member of a Dynamic Group if it is of the same Content Type and it is not excluded by way of any of the filter critera specified for that group. By default, if a group has an empty filter (`{}`) it will include all objects of the matching Content Type, just as a defaut list view of objects would prior to any filter fields being filled in the web UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An object is considered to be a member of a Dynamic Group if it is of the same Content Type and it is not excluded by way of any of the filter criteria specified for that group. By default, if a group has an empty filter (`{}`) it will include all objects of the matching Content Type, just as a default list view of objects would prior to any filter fields being filled in the web UI.
```

For example, for a Dynamic Group with Content Type of `dcim.device` and an empty filter, the list of members would be equivalent to the queryset for `Device.objects.all()`.

!!! warning

>     This behavior was changed in v1.4.0. In v1.3.0 the default for a group with an empty filter was to fail "closed" and have zero members. As of v1.4.0, this behavior has been inverted to include all objects matching the content type by default instead of matching no objects. This was necessary to implement the progressive layering of child filters similarly to how we use filters to reduce desired objects from basic list view filters. This will described in more detail below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This behavior was changed in v1.4.0. In v1.3.x the default for a group with an empty filter was to fail "closed" and have zero members. As of v1.4.0, this behavior has been inverted to include all objects matching the content type by default instead of matching no objects. This was necessary to implement the progressive layering of child filters similarly to how we use filters to reduce desired objects from basic list view filters. This is described in more detail below.
```

The Dynamic Group edit view has a **Filter Fields** tab that allows one to specify filter criteria. The filter fields available for a given Content Type are backed and validated by underlying filterset classes (for example `nautobot.dcim.filters.DeviceFilterSet`) and are represented in the web interface as a dynamically-generated filter form that corresponds to each eligible filter field.

> Any invalid field names that are not eligible for filtering objects will be discarded upon validation. Any invalid field values will result in a validation error.

Author: I need to make sure that as of v1.4 that this assertion is still correct. I believe that strict filtering may in face make the filterset complain loudly on an invalid filter parameter.

Author: Yep. This assertion is no longer correct. Mention needs to be made of the new `settings.STRICT_FILTERING` option, otherwise invalid filter parameters do result in errors:

```python
In [3]: s = parent.filterset_class({"bogus": True}, Device.objects.all())

In [4]: s.is_valid()
Out[4]: False

In [5]: s.errors
Out[5]: {'bogus': ['Unknown filter field']}
```

## Advanced Filtering

> <!-- markdownlint-disable MD036 -->
> _Added in version 1.4.0_
> <!-- markdownlint-enable MD036 -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Added in version 1.4.0_ <!-- markdownlint-disable-line MD036 -->
```

Advanced filtering is performed using nested Dynamic Group memberships.

An object is considered a member of an advanced Dynamic Group if it matches the aggregated filter criteria across all descendant groups.

The Dynamic Group edit view has a **Child Groups** tab that allows one to make other Dynamic Groups of the same content type children of the parent group.

!!! important

>     Filter fields and child groups are mutually exclusive. A group may have either a filter defined, or child groups, but not both.

Author: This still isn't enforced in the UI. Need to fix this. I'll do it as a part of the screenshooting and process flow stuff and submit the fix under a different PR.

Reviewer: This is #2141 correct?

### Filter Generation

> Descendant filters are always processed from the top down (or from left to right) starting with the parent group and ending with the last nested child group.

Author: top-down/left-to-right. Need to pick one for the sake of illustration and use it consistently.

> The nesting of Dynamic Group is performed using two advanced patterns: Set and graphs. Rules for each child group are processed using a set `operator`, and groups are sorted hierarchically as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where the `weight` is used for sorting child groups topologically.

Author: ```suggestion
The nesting of Dynamic Groups is performed using two advanced patterns: Set and graphs. Rules for each child group are processed using a set `operator`, and groups are sorted hierarchically as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where the `weight` is used for sorting child groups topologically.
```

In both cases, the ordering of the tree of descendants from a parent group to its nested children is significant and critically important to how each subsequent filter or group of filters are processed to result in a final set of member objects.

Consider an example where there is a graph from the parent group to three direct child groups, the third of which has its own nested child group:

```no-highlight
parent
- first-child
- second-child
- third-child
  - nested-child
```

The filter generation would walk the graph topologically, starting from the base filter of `parent`, the filter of `first-child` would be applied to that of `parent`, then `second-child`, in order, all the way down. In the case of `third-child`, all of its children (only `nested-child` in this case) would be processed in order in the same way and the resultant filter from all of the child groups for `third-child` would be used to process the filter that resulted from the filter of `second-child`.

> If this is confusing, don't worry. We'll cover it more in hands-on examples after this section.

Author: Before jumping into this, there should be an example setup with each group's rules defined so it's clear on what exactly we're working with, and then introduce the more complex concepts iteratively.

Author: Ugh this has turned out to be super confusing to jump back and forth from technical reference to user guide. I decided to split them up.

### Weights

Weights are used to enforce the topological sorting of how filters are processed when traversing from a parent to each descending child group. Because this ordering is significant, care must be taken when constructing nested Dynamic Groups to result in filter parameters that have the desired outcome.

> In practice, weights are automatically assigned in increments of `10`. In the web UI, child groups may be dragged and dropped to explicitly sort them.

Author: Expand on this, that in the API the weights must be manually specified. This may also need to be unit tested more robustly.

Using the example group hierarchy above, the weights would be as follows:

```no-highlight
parent
- first-child {weight: 10}
- second-child {weight: 20}
- third-child {weight: 30}
  - nested-child {weight: 10}
```

### Operators

Set theory is applied when a new group is added as a child group. Three key concepts are at play: Intersections, Unions, and Differences.

> Any filters provided by the child groups are used to filter the members from the parent group using one of three operators: **Restrict (AND)**, **Include (OR)**, or **Exclude (NOT)**. This allows for logical parenthetical grouping of nested groups by the operator you choose for that child group association to the parent.

Author: ```suggestion

Any filters provided by the child groups are used to filter the members from the parent group using one of three operators: **Restrict (AND)**, **Include (OR)**, or **Exclude (NOT)**. This allows for logical parenthetical grouping of nested groups by the operator you choose for that child group association to the parent.
```

Author: Also this is confusing. Jumped right from set operation descriptors into our user-readable verbs we selected.

We have attempted to simplify working with these operators by giving them both human-readable and Boolean name mappings. They are as follows:

> - **Restrict (Boolean `AND`)** - The **Restrict** operator performs a set _intersection_ on the queryset, and is equivalent to a Boolean `AND`. Any objects matching the child filter are _restricted_ (aka _intersected_) with the preceding filter. All filter criteria must match between the filters for a member object to be included in the resultant filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Restrict (Boolean `AND`)** - The **Restrict** operator performs a set _intersection_ on the queryset, and is equivalent to a Boolean `AND`. The preceding filter is _restricted_ (aka _intersected_) by the objects matching the child filter. All filter criteria must match between the filters for a member object to be included in the resultant filter.
```

> - **Include (Boolean `OR`)** - The **Include** operator performs a set _union_ on the queryset, and is equivalent to a Boolean `OR`. Any objects matching the child filter are _included_ (aka _unioned_) with the preceding filter. Any filter criteria may match between the filters for member objects to be included in the resultant filter.

Reviewer: Reading this, I feel the need to stir the can of worms a bit more - would `Extend` be a clearer verb than `Include`?

```suggestion
- **Include (Boolean `OR`)** - The **Include** operator performs a set _union_ on the queryset, and is equivalent to a Boolean `OR`. The preceding filter is _extended to include_ (aka _unioned with_) any objects matching the child filter. Any filter criteria may match between the filters for member objects to be included in the resultant filter.
```

Author: I don't know anymore. I've said the words so much they've lost all meaning!

> - **Exclude (Boolean `NOT`)** - The **Exclude** operator performs a set _difference_ on the queryset, and is equivalent to a Boolean `NOT`. Any objects matching the child filter are _excluded_ (aka _differenced_) from the preceding filter. Any matching objects from the child filter will be negated from the members of the resultant filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Exclude (Boolean `NOT`)** - The **Exclude** operator performs a set _difference_ on the queryset, and is equivalent to a Boolean `NOT`. The preceding filter _excludes_ (aka _differences_) any objects matching the child filter. Any matching objects from the child filter will be negated from the members of the resultant filter.
```

> Using the example group hiearchy from above, let's apply operators and explain how it would work:

Author: ```suggestion
Using the example group hierarchy from above, let's apply operators and explain how it would work:
```

```no-highlight
parent
- first-child {weight: 10, operator: intersection}
- second-child {weight: 20, operator: union}
- third-child {weight: 30, operator: difference}
  - nested-child {weight: 10, operator: intersection}
```

> 

Reviewer: Need to add the promised "explain how it would work" section here.

## Creating Dynamic Groups

Dynamic Groups can be created through the UI under _Organization > Dynamic Groups_ and clicking the "Add" button, or through the REST API.

> Each Dynamic Group must have a human-readable **Name** string, e.g. `device-site-ams01` and a **Slug**, which should be a simple database-friendly string. By default, the slug will be automatically generated from the name, however you may customize it if you like. You may also assign a corresponding human-friendly **Description** (e.g. "Devices in site AMS01"). Finally, you must select a **Content Type** for the group that determines the filtering parameters available include objects as member into the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Dynamic Group must have a human-readable **Name** string, e.g. `device-site-ams01` and a **Slug**, which should be a simple database-friendly string. By default, the slug will be automatically generated from the name, however you may customize it if you like. You may also assign a corresponding human-friendly **Description** (e.g. "Devices in site AMS01"). Finally, you must select a **Content Type** for the group that determines the kind of objects that can be members of the group and the corresponding filtering parameters available.
```

Once a new Dynamic Group is created, the **Filter Fields** or **Child Groups** may be specified.

!!! note

>     The content type of a Dynamic Group cannot be modified once created, so take care in selecting this initially. This helps to reduce the possibility of inconsistent data and enforces the importance of thinking about the network data model when defining a new Dynamic Group.

Author: ```suggestion
    The content type of a Dynamic Group cannot be modified once created, so take care in selecting this initially. This is intended to prevent the possibility of inconsistent data and enforces the importance of thinking about the data model when defining a new Dynamic Group.
```

Consider, for example, the following Dynamic Group:

```json
{
    "id": "9664758b-9de1-4b2b-87c2-8be40aa2238d",
    "url": "http://localhost:6789/api/extras/dynamic-groups/9664758b-9de1-4b2b-87c2-8be40aa2238d/",
    "name": "devices-a-star",
    "slug": "devices-a-star",
    "description": "Devices in sites starting with 'A'",
    "content_type": "dcim.device",
    "filter": {
        "site": [
            "ams01",
            "ang01",
            "atl01",
            "atl02",
            "azd01"
        ]
    },
    "display": "devices-a-star"
}
```

It is an error to provide any value other than a JSON object (`{}` or a Python dictionary) for the `filter` field. Additionally, most fields within the `filter` accept multiple values and must be represented as a JSON array (Python list). Certain fields take Boolean values (JSON `true`/`false`) or single numeric integers or character strings.

For example, consider this filter:

```json
{
  "has_interfaces": true,

>   "name": "ams01-edge-01"

Reviewer: Is this accurate? Is `DeviceFilterSet.name` really a single-value filter, not a multi-value filter?

Author: Yes. It's because it's not included in the base filter form, and also it's a string field, so it becomes difficult to map it to a UI form field because it doesn't technically have choices. So it's getting bolted on. We have it slated to be fixed in some way but we still need to come up with the "multi-value char filters that aren't backed by related fields" solution. Same with `asset_tag` and `serial` BTW.

```
In [3]: fs = parent.filterset_class({"name": "ams01-edge-01"}, Device.objects.all()).qs

In [4]: fs = parent.filterset_class({"name": "ams01-edge-01"}, Device.objects.all())

In [5]: fs.qs
Out[5]: <ConfigContextModelQuerySet [<Device: ams01-edge-01>]>
```

Reviewer: Thanks. What's the tracking issue for fixing this?

Author: https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/issues/2162

}
```

> This would result in a Dynamic Group of a single Device with name "ams01-edge-01" if-and-only-if that device also has interfaces. While this likely wouldn't be all that useful of a filter for a Dynamic Group in practice, it illustrates that some fields take only one value instead of an array of values. It also underscores how important it is to think deliberately about defining your filter criteria.

Reviewer: Somewhere in this document we need to explain the logic of multiple filter criteria within a single Dynamic Group, i.e. the idea that multiple filter values for a single field are *generally* ORed together (except for Tags!) while multiple distinct filter fields are generally ANDed together.

Author: Yeah that's in the latest updates. But your input is good to expand on it. This has turned out to be kind of not easy.

!!! warning
    _Changed in version 1.4.0_  <!-- markdownlint-disable-line MD036 -->

     v1.3.0 the default for a group with an empty filter was to fail "closed" and have zero members.

    As of v1.4.0, this behavior has been inverted to include all objects matching the content type by default instead of matching no objects. This was necessary to implement the progressive layering of child filters similarly to how we use filters to reduce desired objects from basic list view filters. This will described in more detail below.

When editing a Dynamic Group, under the **Filter Options** section, you will find a **Filter Fields** tab that allows one to specify filter criteria. The filter fields available for a given Content Type are backed and validated by underlying filterset classes (for example `nautobot.dcim.filters.DeviceFilterSet`) and are represented in the web interface as a dynamically-generated filter form that corresponds to each eligible filter field.

For example, to specify a filter condition that would filter on site "AMS01", you would edit a group, populate the desired filter fields fields, and then click "Update".

> ![Setting site=ams01](../../media/models/dynamicgroup05.png)

Author: Thanks for this review. I'm still refactoring and moving things around. It'll make sense in the next push.

An object is considered a member of an advanced Dynamic Group if it matches the aggregated filter criteria across all descendant groups.

When editing a Dynamic Group, under the **Filter Options** section, you will find a **Child Groups** tab that allows one to make other Dynamic Groups of the same content type children of the parent group.

![Child Groups](../../media/models/dynamicgroup02.png)

!!! important
    Filter fields and child groups are mutually exclusive. A group may have either a filter defined, or child groups, but not both.

In the event that you attempt to add child groups to a dynamic group that already has a `filter` defined, or populate a filter on a dynamic group that already has children, this will result in a `ValidationError`. For example:

![Dynamic Group Membership validation error](../../media/models/dynamicgroup03.png)

### Filter Generation

Filters are always processed hiearchically from the top down starting from the parent group and descending recursively to the last nested child group in order by the `weight` value assigned to that group when it was associated to its parent.

!!! note

>     For the purpose illustration, we will use "left to right" terminology since when verbally describing precedence in English, we read from left to right, so that following it will be more intuitive.

Author: Haha... I'll reword it.

| Include  | Union         | OR      | Any criteria from parent/child filters _may_ match           |
| Exclude  | Difference    | NOT     | All matches from child filter are _negated_ from parent filter |

Any filters provided by the child groups are used to filter the members from the parent group using one of the three operators: **Restrict (AND)**, **Include (OR)**, or **Exclude (NOT)**. This allows for logical parenthetical grouping of nested groups by the operator you choose for that child group association to the parent.

Using the example group hierarchy from above, let's apply operators and explain how it would work:

```no-highlight
parent {filter: None}
- first-child {weight: 10, operator: intersection, filter: site=ams01}
- second-child {weight: 20, operator: union, fitler: site=ang01}
- third-child {weight: 30, operator: difference, filter: None}
  - nested-child {weight: 10, operator: intersection, filter: status=active}
```

Logically, the filter will be expressed like so using the hierarchy above:

```no-highlight
((first-child OR second-child) AND (NOT nested-child))
```

> #### How does this work?

Author: Yeah diagrams or something might help. I dunno.

> First, the filters for direct children for a group will always be included in a parenthetical grouping, separated by the operator. Any _empty_ filters are skipped as they imply a parent group that contains other groups. Therefore the filter of `parent` and the filter of `third-child` are not directly used for generating the filter. The filter from `parent` is passed through from left to right as the "base" filter.

Reviewer: Maybe instead of talking of skipping empty filters, talk about parent groups each starting from a basis of "all objects"? It's especially confusing as currently worded as it suggests that `parent` is both skipped (since it's an empty filter) and also passed through as a "base" filter, which at first read sounds self-contradictory.

Maybe talk about evaluating from bottom-up instead of left-to-right? I.e. it may be a lot clearer to talk about calculating `third-child` from its children, then applying all three of `first-child`, `second-child`, and the derived `third-child`, versus the current approach of suggesting that `third-child` works fundamentally differently from the other two children.

Author: Now I'm confused. Let's pair on this.

Similarly, by the time we get to `third-child`, the filter at that node in the graph will have already had the filter from `first-child` and `second-child` applied, and will merely be passed through to the filter generated from the children of `third-child`.

> Because `first-child` and `second-child` are "included" by way of the `union` set operator (Boolean `OR`), but because the filter for `third-child` is empty as explained above, its filter condition is not directly included, resulting in `(first-child OR second-child)` as the first group, representing all _direct_ filters for the group `parent`.

Reviewer: Confusing here as `OR` is specified for `second-child` only, but `first-child` uses `AND`, yet here the first sentence seems to imply that both children are using `OR`. See my suggestion below about explicitly including "all objects" as the starting point for the parent filter as perhaps a clearer approach.

Also I don't know that distinguishing between "direct" and "indirect" filters adds any clarity to the discussion?

Continuing on to the children of `third-child`, the same iteration rules apply. The filter from `nested-child` gets applied to the filter being passed through from its parent, `third-child`, except that the "exclude" (boolean `NOT`) operator is still applied from the association of `third-child` to parent resulting in `(NOT nested-child`).

!!! note
    You'll see `NOT` emitted as an `AND NOT` because `NOT` is actually just shorthand for this. They are in fact interchangeable as Boolean operators. While it's technically possible to perform an `OR NOT` query from a database perspective, it is not supported by Dynamic Groups because the `NOT` operator maps directly to the "difference" set operation which is distinctly an `AND NOT` Boolean operation when performing underlying SQL queries at the database.

Piecing the rules together, we ended up with two filters and by wrapping them in their own set of parentheses we get our final generated filter:

```no-highlight

> ((first-child OR second-child) AND (NOT nested-child))

Reviewer: I wonder if it would be any clearer to skip over the discussion of omitting the AND in various cases and start with the fully explicit expression, something like:

```
(
  (
    [ALL OBJECTS]
    AND first-child
  )
  OR second-child
)
AND NOT (
  [ALL OBJECTS]
  AND nested-child
)
```

```

How does this work?

| Start with   | Filter        | Operator | Weight | Group Count | Final Count |
| ------------ | ------------- | -------- | ------ | ----------- | ----------- |
| parent       | none          | none     | none   | 389         | 389         |
| first-child  | site=ams01    | restrict | 10     | 11          | 11          |
| second-child | site=ang01    | include  | 20     | 7           | 18          |
| third-child  | none          | none     | 30     | 389         | n/a         |

> | nested-child | status=active | exclude  | 10     | 389         | 0           |

Reviewer: - This table is using restrict/include/exclude, while the previous table is using intersection/union/difference - would be good to be consistent.
- Group Count and Final Count aren't discussed anywhere above and so suddenly introducing them here confuses things rather than clarifying them, I think

Author: This is a WIP. I have no idea where to put this.

### Assigning Child Groups

> TBD. Higher-weight fields will be ordered lower within a form. (The default weight is 100.)

Reviewer: 100? or 10?

## Dynamic Groups and the REST API

Dynamic Groups are fully supported by the API.

### Creating a Dynamic Group

Request:

```json
POST /api/extras/dynamic-groups/
{
    "name": "parent2",
    "slug": "parent2",
    "description": "I am the parent group with nested children.",
    "content-type": "dcim.device"
}
```

Response:

```json
200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "id": "03df0328-337c-4eeb-9095-fa2764cb31e2",
    "display": "parent",
    "url": "http://localhost:6789/api/extras/dynamic-groups/03df0328-337c-4eeb-9095-fa2764cb31e2/",
    "name": "parent",
    "slug": "parent",
    "description": "I am the parent group with nested children.",
    "content_type": "dcim.device",
    "filter": {},
    "children": [],
    "created": "2022-07-06",
    "last_updated": "2022-07-06T20:17:04.305663Z",
    "custom_fields": {},
    "computed_fields": {},
    "relationships": {}
}
```

> 

Reviewer: In the REST API, can you assign a `filter` or `children` as part of an initial POST/`create` operation, or does it have to be a two-step process like the web UI requires?

### Specifying Filter Conditions

Dynamic Groups are fairly straightforward however it is important to note that the `filter` field is a JSON field and it must be able to be used as valid query parameters for filtering objects of the corresponding content type.

!!! warning
    _Changed in version 1.4.0_  <!-- markdownlint-disable-line MD036 -->

    Prior to v1.4.0, any invalid field names that are not eligible for filtering objects will be discarded upon validation.

    As of v1.4.0, [strict filtering is enabled by default](../../../configuration/optional-settings/#strict_filtering), which causes any invalid field names to result in a `ValidationError`.

Any invalid field values for valid field names will also result in a `ValidationError`.

> Consider, for example, the following Dynamic Group:

Reviewer: Is this an example of invalid field names or field values? Or is it a valid example? Not clear from context.

```json
{
    "id": "9664758b-9de1-4b2b-87c2-8be40aa2238d",
    "url": "http://localhost:6789/api/extras/dynamic-groups/9664758b-9de1-4b2b-87c2-8be40aa2238d/",
    "name": "devices-a-star",
    "slug": "devices-a-star",
    "description": "Devices in sites starting with 'A'",
    "content_type": "dcim.device",
    "filter": {
        "site": [
            "ams01",
            "ang01",
            "atl01",
            "atl02",
            "azd01"
        ]
    },
    "display": "devices-a-star"
}
```

> It is an error to provide any value other than a JSON object (`{}` or a Python dictionary) for the `filter` field. Additionally, most fields within the `filter` accept multiple values and must be represented as a JSON array (Python list). Certain fields take Boolean values (JSON `true`/`false`) or single numeric integers or character strings.

Reviewer: Now we're back to talking about errors - so I guess the above was an example of invalid input? What specifically was invalid about it?

For example, consider this filter:

```json
{
  "has_interfaces": true,
  "name": "ams01-edge-01"
}
```

> This would result in a Dynamic Group of a single Device with name "ams01-edge-01" if-and-only-if that device also has interfaces. While this likely wouldn't be all that useful of a filter for a Dynamic Group in practice, it illustrates that some fields take only one value instead of an array of values. It also underscores how important it is to think deliberately about defining your filter criteria.

Reviewer: > It also underscores how important it is to think deliberately about defining your filter criteria.

How so? What's the lesson here?

# Dynamic Groups

Dynamic Groups provide a way to organize objects of the same Content Type by matching filters. A Dynamic Group can be used to create unique groups of objects matching a given filter, such as Devices for a specific site location or set of locations. As indicated by the name, Dynamic Groups update in real time as potential member objects are created, updated, or deleted.

> When creating a Dynamic Group, one must select a Content Type to which it is associated, for example `dcim.device`. The filtering parameters saved to the group behave as a bi-directional search query that used to identify members of that group, and can also be used to determine from an individual object the list of Dynamic Groups to which an individual object belongs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When creating a Dynamic Group, one must select a Content Type to which it is associated, for example `dcim.device`. The filtering parameters saved to the group behave as a bi-directional search query that is used to identify members of that group, and can also be used to determine from an individual object the list of Dynamic Groups to which an individual object belongs.
```

Dynamic Groups can be created through the UI under _Organization > Dynamic Groups_ and clicking the "Add" button, or through the REST API.

Each Dynamic Group must have a human-readable **Name** string, e.g. `devices-site-ams01` and a **Slug**, which should be a simple database-friendly string. By default, the slug will be automatically generated from the name, however you may customize it if you like. You must select a **Content Type** for the group that determines the filtering parameters available include objects as member into the group. Finally, you may also assign a an optional human-friendly **Description** (e.g. "Devices in site AMS01").

Once a new Dynamic Group is created, the group can be configured by clicking the "Edit" button to specify **Filter Fields** or **Child Groups** to use to narrow down the group's member objects. More on this below.

!!! warning
    The content type of a Dynamic Group cannot be modified once created, so take care in selecting this initially. This is intended to prevent the possibility of inconsistent data and enforces the importance of thinking about the data model when defining a new Dynamic Group.

### Working with Dynamic Groups

> Once created and configured, Dynamic Groups can be accessed from the primary Dynamic Groups landing page in the web interface under the _Organization > Dynamic Groups_ menu. From there you may view the list of available groups, search or filter the list, view or edit an individual group, or bulk delete groups. Additionally if a group's filter has matching members, the number of members may be clicked to take you to a filtered list view of those objects.

Author: ```suggestion
Once created and configured, Dynamic Groups can be accessed from the primary Dynamic Groups landing page in the web interface under the _Organization > Dynamic Groups_ menu. From there you may view the list of available groups, search or filter the list, view or edit an individual group, or bulk delete groups. Additionally if a group's filter has matching members, the number of members may be clicked to take you to the list of members for that dynamic group containing those objects.
```

### Filtering

Dynamic Group filtering is powered by **FilterSet** objects underneath the hood. Basic filtering is performed using the `filter` that is defined on a given Dynamic Group. Advanced filtering is performed by aggregating filters from multiple nested Dynamic Groups to form a combined parent Dynamic Group, which will be explained later in this document.

An object is considered to be a member of a Dynamic Group if it is of the same Content Type and it is not excluded by way of any of the filter criteria specified for that group. By default, a freshly created group has an empty filter (`{}`), which will include all objects of the matching Content Type, just as a default list view of those objects would display prior to any filter fields being filled in the web UI.

For example, for a Dynamic Group with Content Type of `dcim.device` and an empty filter, the list of members would be equivalent to the default Device list view, which in turn is equivalent to the queryset for `Device.objects.all()` from the database ORM.

!!! warning
    _Changed in version 1.4.0_  <!-- markdownlint-disable-line MD036 -->

>     v1.3.0 the default for a group with an empty filter was to fail "closed" and have zero members.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In Nautobot v1.3.0 the default for a dynamic group with an empty filter was to fail "closed" and have zero members.
```

    As of v1.4.0, this behavior has been inverted to default to include all objects matching the Content Type, instead of matching no objects as was previously the case. This was necessary to implement the progressive layering of child filters similarly to how we use filters to reduce desired objects from basic list view filters. This will described in more detail below.

#### Basic Filtering

When editing a Dynamic Group, under the **Filter Options** section, you will find a **Filter Fields** tab that allows one to specify filter criteria. The filter fields available for a given Content Type are backed and validated by underlying filterset classes (for example `nautobot.dcim.filters.DeviceFilterSet`) and are represented in the web interface as a dynamically-generated filter form that corresponds to each eligible filter field.

(TODO: screenshots here)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

#### Advanced Filtering

_Added in version 1.4.0_  <!-- markdownlint-disable-line MD036 -->

Advanced filtering is performed using nested Dynamic Group memberships.

An object is considered a member of an advanced Dynamic Group if it matches the aggregated filter criteria across all descendant groups.

When editing a Dynamic Group, under the **Filter Options** section, you will find a **Child Groups** tab that allows one to make other Dynamic Groups of the same Content Type children of the parent group.

> ![Child Groups](../../media/models/dynamicgroup02.png)

Reviewer: Looks like this is the only one of `dynamicgroup0[1-5].png` that we're using now - can we delete the other four and rename this to something like "dynamicgroup_filtering_01.png` instead?

## Example Workflow

Dynamic Groups are a complex topic and are perhaps best understood through a series of worked examples.

### Basic Filtering with a single Dynamic Group

> Let's say you want to create a Dynamic Group that contains all production Devices at your first two Sites. You can create a Dynamic Group called "Devices at Sites A and B" for content-type `dcim | device`, then edit it and set the **Filter Fields** to match:

Author: ```suggestion
Let's say you want to create a Dynamic Group that contains all production Devices at your first two Sites. You can create a Dynamic Group called "Devices at Sites A and B" for Content Type `dcim | device`, then edit it and set the **Filter Fields** to match:
```

Piecing the rules together, we ended up with two filters and by wrapping them in their own set of parentheses we get our final generated filter:

```no-highlight
(
  (
    [ALL OBJECTS]
    AND first-child
  )
  OR second-child
)
AND NOT (
  [ALL OBJECTS]
  AND nested-child
)
```

## Dynamic Groups and the REST API

Dynamic Groups are fully supported by the API. Two distinct endpoints are required, one each for managing Dynamic Groups and for assigning child groups using Dynamic Group Memberships.

### Specifying Filter Conditions

Dynamic Groups are fairly straightforward however it is important to understand how the `filter` field works before digging in.

The `filter` is a JSON field and it must be able to be used as valid query parameters for filtering objects of the corresponding Content Type.

It is an error to provide any value other than a JSON object (`{}` or a Python dictionary) for the `filter` field.

#### Multiple Values

Most fields within the `filter` accept multiple values and must be represented as a JSON array (Python list), for example:

```json
{

>     site: ["ams01", "ang01"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "site": ["ams01", "ang01"]
```

Request:

```json
POST /api/extras/dynamic-groups/

{
    "name": "parent",
    "slug": "parent",
    "description": "I am a parent group with nested children.",
    "content-type": "dcim.device",
    "filter": {},
}
```

Response:

```json
{
    "id": "1f825078-b6dc-4b12-9463-be5a9189b03f",
    "display": "parent",
    "url": "http://localhost:6789/api/extras/dynamic-groups/1f825078-b6dc-4b12-9463-be5a9189b03f/",
    "name": "parent",
    "slug": "parent",
    "description": "I am the parent group with nested children.",
    "content_type": "dcim.device",
    "filter": {},
    "children": [],
    "created": "2022-07-06",
    "last_updated": "2022-07-06T20:17:04.305663Z",
    "custom_fields": {},
    "computed_fields": {},
    "relationships": {}
}
```

#### Updating or Deleting a Dynamic Group

!!! important
  It is not possible to perform a nested update of `children` when updating a new Dynamic Group. You must use the endpoint for creating Dynamic Group Memberships as explained below under [Updating or Deleting Child Groups](#updating-or-deleting-child-groups).

> Updating or deleting Dynamic Group is done by sending a request to the detail endpoint for that object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updating or deleting a Dynamic Group is done by sending a request to the detail endpoint for that object.
```

```json
PUT /api/extras/dynamic-groups/{uuid}/

{
    "name": "I am the best parent group",
    "slug": "best-parent",
    "description": "I am the parent group with nested children.",
    "filter": {}
}
```

Performing a partial update using a `PATCH` request can allow any single field to be updated without affecting the other fields. For example, if we wanted to update only the `slug` for a group:

```json
PATCH /api/extras/dynamic-group-memberships/{uuid}/

{
    "slug": "best-parent"
}
```

To delete a Dynamic Group you would send a `DELETE` request to the detail endpoint:

```json
DELETE /api/extras/dynamic-group-memberships/{uuid}/
```

### Managing Child Groups

Dynamic Groups may be nested to a parent group by creating a new Dynamic Group Membership. The act of assigning a Dynamic Group as a child to a parent group creates a Dynamic Group Membership.

This can be done at the list endpoint found at `/api/extras/dynamic-group-memberships/`.

#### Assigning Child Groups

Dynamic Group Membership objects may be created, updated, or deleted just like any other object and are represented as `children` on the parent group.

!!! note

>   When interacting the the REST API, the `operator` must be provided using the string represetnation that is stored in the database. The human-readable operator names (such as "Exclude (AND)" for "intersection") are not accepted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  When interacting the the REST API, the `operator` must be provided using the string representation that is stored in the database. The human-readable operator names (such as "Exclude (AND)" for "intersection") are not accepted.
```

                "name": "parent",
                "slug": "parent",
                "content_type": "dcim.device"
            },
            "operator": "intersection",
            "weight": 10
        }
    ],
    "created": "2022-07-15",
    "last_updated": "2022-07-15T16:50:45.453965Z",
    "notes_url": "http://localhost:6789/api/extras/dynamic-groups/1f825078-b6dc-4b12-9463-be5a9189b03f/notes/",
    "custom_fields": {}
}
```

#### Updating or Deleting Child Groups

Updating or deleting Dynamic Group Membership is done by sending a request to the detail endpoint for that membership object.

A Dynamic Group Membership may be updated using `PUT` or `PATCH` (for a partial update) requests. A `PUT` request requires the entire object to be updated in place. For example if you wanted to update the `operator` and the `weight` together,leaving every other field with their current values as provided:

```json
PUT /api/extras/dynamic-group-memberships/{uuid}/

{
    "group": {"slug": "first-child"},
    "parent_group": {"slug": "parent"},
    "operator": "difference",
    "weight": 10
}
```

> Performing A partial update using a `PATCH` request can allow any single field to be updated without affecting the other fields. For example, if we only wanted to update the `weight` for a membership:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Performing a partial update using a `PATCH` request can allow any single field to be updated without affecting the other fields. For example, if we only wanted to update the `weight` for a membership:
```

Dynamic Groups can be created through the UI under _Organization > Dynamic Groups_ and clicking the "Add" button, or through the REST API.

Each Dynamic Group must have a human-readable **Name** string, e.g. `devices-site-ams01` and a **Slug**, which should be a simple database-friendly string. By default, the slug will be automatically generated from the name, however you may customize it if you like. You must select a **Content Type** for the group that determines the filtering parameters available include objects as member into the group. Finally, you may also assign a an optional human-friendly **Description** (e.g. "Devices in site AMS01").

Once a new Dynamic Group is created, the group can be configured by clicking the "Edit" button to specify **Filter Fields** or **Child Groups** to use to narrow down the group's member objects. More on this below.

!!! warning
    The content type of a Dynamic Group cannot be modified once created, so take care in selecting this initially. This is intended to prevent the possibility of inconsistent data and enforces the importance of thinking about the data model when defining a new Dynamic Group.

### Working with Dynamic Groups

> Once created and configured, Dynamic Groups can be accessed from the primary Dynamic Groups landing page in the web interface under the _Organization > Dynamic Groups_ menu. From there you may view the list of available groups, search or filter the list, view or edit an individual group, or bulk delete groups. Additionally if a group's filter has matching members, the number of members may be clicked to take you to a filtered list view of those objects.

Author: Let's change "filtered list view" to the "list of members for that dynamic group". 

See: https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/pull/2200/commits/d5c124fa7ff52d00151e3203b1d5aaba3638669d
